Okay, so we start again. Our next talk is about liquid soap. Please welcome Romain.
Hello and good morning. We're really happy to be here after, not two but three actually.
And I want to, we gave a talk here before the whole thing happened that I don't want
to talk about and a lot of things happen and I want to go back to it and talk about what
we did both in the code and with the community and the kind of things that happened. So,
first of all, for those who weren't there, the first talk, what is liquid soap? It's
a programming language. Technically, it's a scripting language, scripted language. It's
statically typed with inferred type. So, if you're familiar with TypeScript, it's TypeScript,
but you don't have to write the type, so everything here is a string, an integer, something. What
does the language do? It allows you to create online stream and it's not a low-level tool,
so we delegate that and I'll talk a lot about it. What we want is to empower the user to
rezone about the tool. That's what the language really does well, programming, logic, business
logic. I want to play that song. I want to switch to a live source. So, that's an example
of a full code that we can use to run two outputs on iSCAS based on, playlist, a file,
a list of requests, an input from HTTP, all sort of stuff. So, what has happened with
liquid soap since first day in 2020? We worked with Radio France. That's the reason we came
in 2020 and it was that starting point of a lot of new work because it really created
a new cycle of work and interest. We had a lot of community growth that reflect back
on it in the first part of this talk. Then we do a lot of new features because guess
what? We also had a lot of time during that time and we worked a lot on it. I want to
finish the talk by talking about future development and challenges that we foresee for the future.
First of all, what happened with the community? I started looking back at the stats over the
past three years and I looked at the GitHub stars. It's nice, but it was growing pretty
steadily except for that little bump here when we did the 2.0 release. I looked at the
Slack channel which I want to move out of this platform, but anyway, it was also growing
pretty linearly. I was like, it doesn't seem really anything happened over the past three
years. Then I looked at the issues. That's why I was like, yeah, I remember that. What
happened is when the whole shutdown happened, because we're a project that enables people
to communicate online, it was one of the places that people wanted to go to communicate with
people and to try to reach out, create link, maintain link. We had a lot of people suddenly
were like, I want to do an online stream. I want to put music for my friend to listen
to. I want to do all these things. The second effect, we had a lot of people with time.
We're one of those projects where you're like, oh, we like it. I like it. I'd like to look
at it at some point, but I'm too busy and suddenly I have time. People started using
it, submitting a lot of issues and well, we got busy. One of the things that we did also
is because we didn't have that kind of in-person meeting, Samuel, who's the other co-developer
of the project, decided that we should do an online workshop, which was the thing to
do. It was really good because what really allowed us is to get to meet our community.
I think one of the things that's really nice with this project is that it's both a technical
project, but a lot of our users are actually not technical people. They're like people
who have Burning Man radio at the Burning Man thing. Some of the cute projects we had was
like the top one was a network of community radios in Barcelona where they literally have
trucks that they bring to different neighborhoods to the online reporting of what happens in
the city. The lower one was another Hungarian community radio. That was really good to get
to meet that. I think we valued that a lot. Of course, we have industrial users, but this
is also one of the core motivations for the project for us.
Then eventually another thing we did, again, by project of having a lot of time, which
was mainly Sam working on it, was to write a programming book specialized in audio stream
media stream and how to use LiquidSoup for it. It was very useful on many levels. One
of them is that it forced us to rethink our API and reorganize it. You say, can we do that?
What's a good example to do that? Well, actually, it's not clear. Let's make a nice module that
can do that easily, document it, and also it enabled the users a lot to be more confident
because as I said, most of our users are not programmers. They come to this and they're
like, whoa, never touch a line of code. How can I do? That book was a really good starting
point to get people interested and more confident with the project.
What did we do for the new features though? That's the gist of the work we did. First
of all, we did a lot of language changes because for a long time our focus was more on features.
We only did a lot of output, a lot of input, a lot of different interesting operators.
When you start to want to implement things that are more complex, you also need powerful
language extension or toolbox. Also, we did a lot of FMP integration. Those are the two
things that I'm going to talk next. First, the language change. More expressivity. You
want to enable your users to write code that is nice, readable, that they can understand,
that is powerful, but it doesn't have to have a million lines to do a simple thing. Simple
things like that. These are like spreads to spread out a list. You have a list, you want
to get the first element, last element, and whatever else is left as a remainder.
We could do that before, but you will get to use functions and it was complicated. This
really helps users just visualize the code and be like, all right, I understand what
this is doing and I have much less lines to write it. We implemented a lot of types that
were missing. For instance, a null variable. A lot of that will remain in the sense of
course, dynamic scripting languages like JavaScript or others. We didn't have a null value. We
did a null value and we added a nice operator that says if you have a null on X, if X is
not null, it's a string, then you get X. If it's null, you get the string foo. Stuff like
that. When you start writing actual usable code, you need these things and they are very
useful. You can write functions with optional argument and you can exactly say the user
didn't pass an argument. That's just basic programming language features.
The other thing we did that was very useful is a new module syntax. That basically means
that any value in the language can be attached methods or attributes to it. Here you have
a string and a string has two methods. Well, attributes here, duration, floating number
and BPM. It's basically an object oriented ID but not really an object. More like JavaScript
hash I guess. That means that you can query the song.duration and get the floating point
duration, or you can print the subtitle as a string using the underlying value.
That was really useful because when you want to create something that's easy to use for
a user, you need to structure your language. You need to have modules and you need to have
function in those modules. Also, another typical case is that now you can specialize things.
You have sources that have different functions. All sources have a skip function. It means
that you can get to the next track in your stream. You may have sources that have specific
function. For instance, you can have a source that can insert metadata that's created with
this operator. It will be added a new function that's called insertMetadata. Now you can
use it. Instead of having a billion of general calls that are API based, you can start really
attaching specific use to specific variables and then make things more compact, more specialized,
and very useful for cleaning up your API. Another thing we did after that with the module
is that now we were able to describe high level things. One of those things that's really
painful in statically typed language is parsing JSON. Why? Because JSON can be anything. We
really want to know that name is a string. We really want to know that name is a version.
In language like OCaml, you have to parse an object, iterate through the keys, validate
that it's a string. Every branch of that, you need to think of what you're doing. Our
users, again, not programmers. What do we do? We try to find a primitive that's readable
and easy to use. What are you reading here? You're reading a parsing statement that says
I want to parse and I want to get a module that's going to have a name, a version, and
another script attribute that is itself a module that has a test function. It's what
you get in a package.json for node modules. This is a type annotation that says I want
the name to be a string, the version to be a string, and the script to be a module with
a test that's a string. At runtime, we're going to take all this information and we're
going to try to parse this and we're going to do two things. If we have what we need
in the JSON, you can go on with your script. If we don't, we raise an error, you can catch
the error and reason with it. That really makes parsing of JSON more easier on the user,
which is important because, again, when you want to connect a lot of interconnected systems
for streaming, you want to be able to talk to JSON API. Pretty useful. We did the same
for YAML recently. You can do settings now. That's the new features. There's more, but
I don't want to spend too much time on it because the other part that I want to talk
that's exciting is the FFmpeg integration. That really started after Radio France because
they had a strong need for it and we started looking at the API from FFmpeg. The thing
with the API from FFmpeg is that it's really good. It's amazingly good. It's all very low
level in C. For us, because I didn't mention that LiquidSub is implemented in OCaml, we
need to speak to low level implementation to really be efficient. We can talk to Perl
or to whatever, Python. This C is really simple for us, but it's also extremely abstract.
That really helps us because, again, we want to do what we do well, which is the programming
language side, the logic, the typing, the functions. We're not specialists in multimedia
implementation. We don't want to do that. We want to find people who do it better than
us and interface with it. That's the API for a FFmpeg packet, which is a little tiny bit
of encoded data. It contains, I don't know, an MP3 frame, a video, A or B frame, all the
abstract things I don't want to know about. He's going to tell me two things. He's going
to tell me, this is your data. This is your pointer to a presentation timestamp. Another
thing here tells me, this is the time at which you want to insert this packet in your stream.
This is the data. That's all I need to know because then we can build a stream with it.
We can pass this packet around to our different operators, not even knowing what they contain.
The other thing that FFmpeg really... Yeah, so that's what we started doing. We started
implementing a new encoder that was basically reflecting everything that you see as a parameter
in the FFmpeg comment line. We think that we support it as an option in those encoders.
Why do we think that? It's because another thing that FFmpeg really does really well
is describing their API. I'm sorry, that's not very readable. That's a C structure that
has all the parameters name here for H.264 encoders, description, type, somewhere, and
minimum, maximum value, everything we need to basically write an interface to it. It
also does it for filters. Again, not very readable. Sorry about that, but it's basically
a programmatic interface to everything you need to know about parameters for FFmpeg.
That's also not readable. Great. Then what we can do is this is an FFmpeg filter implemented
in Liquid Soap. If you could read well, you would see that every parameter in the filter,
like speed, is a floating point, optional. It has no value default. They saw no value
default. Sometimes they don't. We get this information from the FFmpeg C API, and we
can plug into it immediately and be very confident that we're using it well. One of the things
it allows us to do is to actually have scripted manipulation of FFmpeg primitive-like filters.
We take a source, and we want to define a filter that is a flanger followed by a highpass
and then output it. You need a graph. That's just part of the C API. You need a source.
You create a new input from it. That's the FFmpeg side. That's what they call a new input.
You pass it to the filter with the parameters. Everything is typed here, so we can check.
That is the right value. Then you create an output. Around that, you have a high-level
description of your filter. I don't know if you all have manipulated FFmpeg filters,
but when you want to do complex filters, they have a description graph that's pretty hard
to read. I'm used to that, so I'm biased. I can read these things easier, but also it's
kind of more descriptive. It's typed, too. This is another filter. It takes an audio,
splits it into two sources. One of them is going to go through a flanger. The other one
is a highpass. This is some conversion that was required. I don't know why. Then you merge
them back. We're describing now a graph that branches out, do two filtering, and comes
back together. This is a simple one, but you could use that to do a multi-band compressor,
for instance. You can do that in FFmpeg. It's a little bit more structured and readable
and also type safe. Next, I want to talk about how we implemented that. Yeah, I still have
some time. This is the timeline for us. Infinite time. We start it here, and we go all the way
here. If you use your imagination, all these little horizontal dots are audio packets that
came from FFmpeg. Vertical ones are video frame. This is your stream of data that you're
sending to an ice castle to anything. What we do is that we find the lowest common denominator
between the video rate and the audio rate. We need to find a little chunk of time that
will contain the same amount of audio and data. Most of the time with the parameters
we have internally, it would be 0.04 seconds. That's what we call our frame. Then the idea
of the streaming loop, on-strip parsed and prepared all your outputs, is to just recreate
that frame every 0.04 seconds infinitely many times. That just creates your stream. Here's
an example. We have a simple script. It has two outputs. It wants to save to a file and
send to an icecast server. FFmpeg is an operator that will take the first source available.
The first one is an input. It's a hardboard. It's one of the operators we have that can
receive icecast clients. Let's say you want a DJ to connect to your radio. You can direct
them to this input, and they start streaming. The FFmpeg will stream that data immediately.
If it's not available, we have a queue of requests that you can... Let's say you want to send
a track to be played immediately after the following one. Every now and then you can
send a request here. Otherwise, we have a playlist of files in the directory. If that
is not available, we have some kind of fallback. Just in case everything fails, something that's
going to say, I don't know, we're having technical issues. Please come back.
Now we're going to run the streaming algorithm and see how we do that. Output.file starts.
It always goes back from the output down to the inputs. The reason is because all of that
is dynamic. There's no reason to start asking these people here to prepare data. They might
not be used because up in the graph, the fallback might choose to use just one of them. We have
to start from the output, bring it down. I have an empty frame, a cycle 23, sudden streaming
cycle, and I want to fill it up with 0.04 seconds of data. I go to the fallback and say,
hey, can you fill up this frame? Fallback is like, sure, let me ask first. Input the
hard bar, not available. But request.queue has something in the queue, actually. Let
me pass it down, pass it down to this operator. Request.queue partially fills the frame. It
added a little bit of audio and one video frame. What you can think about it is that
it was just finishing a track. Remember, request.queue takes files when you want to play them, so
I don't know. It's just done playing the jingle or the commercial that you want it to finish.
That's it. I'm done. It's a partial fill of the frame, in which case it comes back to
the fallback that says, I need more. Playlist is not available. For some reason, the directory
is empty. We go back to the single and say, hey, single, can you fill this frame? One
of the things we do when we start the script is that we actually double check that we have
at least one operator here that's always going to be available. That's what happens here.
The fallback is being used. Single is the, sure, I got a file. I prepared it. It's back
and decode it. Boom. Finish filling up the frame. Then it goes all the way up the tree.
We're ready to encode that, save it in the file.
Now comes the second one, which is the icecast output. Same thing. It's like, hey, I need
to send data to my icecast server. It goes back to the fallback. Then what we do here,
of course, we cache stuff. We know that fallback has already produced the whole frame. We have
saved it. We can just fill it up here, send it back to icecast, again, encode it if needed,
send it back.
The thing that's really nice with this algorithm is that, again, we don't really care about
what's in the frame. We just care that we know that we can fill it up and we know how
much it's filled, and then we can pass it down.
These things can actually be FFmpeg encoded packet. Not a problem. They can be raw PCM,
and then we have to encode them. Again, we are just looking at things from a high level
perspective. If the time for that whole cycle was t, we have two possibilities. If we generated
0.04 second in less than 0.04 second for the computer, it means that we run faster than
the real time. We can sleep a little bit because we're generating things in real time.
If not, we have a problem. We need to catch up, so we need to run the loop again as fast
as possible. Basically, if you're in the red, you have a problem. It means that, I don't
know, encoding takes too long. Something happened in your script. You cannot produce in real
time. What we want is to be in the green all the time so that we know we can deliver the
content at a real time rate all the time.
That's how it works. Because I told you all that we now can use encoded content, we're
having a little bit of problems that I won't have time to describe here, but essentially,
sometimes we have to do a lower level understanding of what's happened in the bit stream.
Basically, in FFmpeg, you have things that's called extra data. If you take an MP4 media,
everything that is needed to decode like fman table is in the header, it's communicated
first, and then all the packets, the frames after that don't have it. If you take MPEG-TS,
because MPEG-TS doesn't have a global header, every frame is going to have that data. That
was a problem because now we do things that FFmpeg doesn't do, which is a live switch
between two different bit streams. This is a RTMP input, this is a file, MP4. When we
live switch, if we started with this one, for instance, the MUXR from FFmpeg might say,
oh, you know what? If we started with this one, the MUXR would say, I know that all my
friends are going to have the private data that I need, I can go on with it. Then we
live switch to that, and suddenly we start receiving frames that don't have it. The MUXR
is like, whoops, I cannot do it. We have to insert those filters here to make sure that
they're always present, which is a problem for us because it means that the user has
to think about low-level stuff. That's part of one of the questions that I was wondering
if FFmpeg might find some of the beautiful abstraction they have to alleviate that kind
of problem.
All right, almost done. I'm going to finish real quick. We have a 2.0 X-release with tracks
so you can manipulate and remix different track, let's say, do an MKV with French English
and Italian soundtrack and encode it in different format. We want to rewrite the whole clocking
system and streaming because OCaml 5 now does concurrency. It's pretty exciting. We want
to think about JavaScript and WSM because we can do it and why not. I'm very interested
to see what VLC does because that's the next part and why they do it.
Long-term development, though, is what we are wondering about because we have grown
a lot of community, but most of our users are not programmers and our programming language
is OCaml, which is still a niche language, and we're two developers, someone and myself.
One of the questions, the project is 20 years. We are 40-year-old. At some point, you need
to think about moving on. What we have done so far is do a lot of automation, which is
very powerful. It allows us to focus on the code and have less testing to do. We have
automated relays. We do CI to run all the tests every time. We have augmented the number
of automated tests we have so that we catch everything very quickly instead of relying
on a lot of manual testing. But it's far as a challenge to think about how we can bring
in more developers that like OCaml, like radio, is a pretty intersection of two niche things.
That's it for me, and thank you very much for your time, and maybe there are questions.
It was actually an answer. There are APIs in FFmpeg to inform the user of the CI API
whether or not they need to insert those filters. I see that there is automatic insertion of
those filters in the code. I guess I have to have another pass at making sure I understand
when and how. I regretfully for this presentation, I didn't dive again, and I remember that sometimes
it becomes a little bit intricate. But thank you very much. I will definitely have another
look.
It's possible to control the running script using an external automation, especially like
editing running playlists.
Yeah, absolutely. Are there any tools to control a running script from the external user? We
have a lot of different options. The traditional one, the old one was a telnet connection.
But we have a fully featured HTTP server, so you can write your own API endpoints. Because
every source has their own methods now that are attached to it, and you can run scripts,
you can basically take a source and say, okay, there's a function that inserts metadata.
I plugged that into running everything else. We're a programming language, so yeah, we
have a lot of different options for that, for sure.
Last question. Can you use LiquidSub to do static operations, not for to compare spikes
and not with the goal of doing streaming, just to apply operations on many video files?
The answer is yes, because the clock doesn't have to be real. Oh yeah. Can you use LiquidSub
to do offline processing faster than real time and not just real time? The answer is
yes, because you can run a clock that says, I don't want you to be real time, I want you
to run as fast as possible. But the sub answer is that it's not a common case, it's not commonly
tested, and that's part of the thing that I want to bring on more when we rewrite the
streaming. Because for instance, a request needs to resolve a file, which needs to make
a network request, download the file, test it, you can decode that. Most of the time we
expect that to take a while, but it's not been tested a lot when you want to run very,
very fast, and you run into race conditions that are very different.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Thank you.